⭐ Notes for Future Work: Station FOV Mask & Bin Scoring System
1. Goal

Build a per‑station Field‑of‑View (FOV) mask that identifies:

    Good bins (open sky, real star tracks pass through)

    Obstructed bins (stars should project here but are never detected)

    Suspicious bins (hot pixels, reflections, false positives)

    Dead bins (never see anything)

This uses both actual detections and predicted star positions via the station’s WCS.
2. Core Inputs

    A reliable RA/Dec → (x, y) projection for each station and time.

    A catalog of stars covering the station’s nominal FOV.

    Observed detections: (x, y, ra, dec, jd, star_name).

3. Global Sanity Check (must pass before scoring)

Before computing any mask:

    Estimate how many catalog stars should be visible on the sensor over the JD range
    using WCS projection.

    Count how many distinct stars were actually detected.

    Compute

ratio=NdetectedNexpected

    If the ratio is too low (e.g., < 0.3), skip mask computation entirely.
    This avoids generating masks from nights with clouds, dew, lens caps, etc.

4. Track Construction (from detections)

For each star that was detected:

    Group detections by star.

    Sort by JD.

    Build a simple track in detector space: (x(t),y(t)).

    Only keep tracks with ≥5 points.

Tracks define where stars were and where they should have been between detections.
5. Predictive Star Projection (using WCS)

For each catalog star:

    Sample times across the JD range.

    Project RA/Dec → (x, y) using the station’s WCS.

    If the projection falls on the sensor, map to a bin.

    This defines “star should be here at time t” events.

This is the key to detecting obstructions:
even if the star is never observed, we know where it should have appeared.
6. Bin Scoring Rules

Each bin starts with score = 0.
Rule A — When a star should be in this bin

(From WCS projection)

    If the bin contains a matching detection at that time → +1

    If the bin does not detect the star → −1
    (obstruction, dead region, sensitivity issue)

Rule B — When no star should be in this bin

(From WCS projection)

    If the bin is quiet → +1

    If the bin fires anyway → −1
    (hot pixel, reflection, junk)

Rule C — Detections that don’t match any predicted star

(From actual detections)

    If a detection occurs at time t in a bin where no star should project → −1
    (false positive)

This combination distinguishes:

    real sky

    obstructions

    hot pixels

    reflections

    mis‑associations

    dead zones

7. Classification

After accumulating scores over many stars and times:

    score >> 0 → good bin

    score ≈ 0 → low‑coverage / uncertain

    score << 0 → suspicious (hot pixel, reflection, junk)

    score very negative → persistent false positives

    score very positive → reliable sky region

Thresholds can be tuned per station.
8. Output

For each station:

    A 2D grid of:

        score[i,j]

        class[i,j] ∈ {−1, 0, +1}

        hits[i,j]

        expected[i,j]

        misses[i,j]

        false_positives[i,j]

This becomes a reusable FOV mask for:

    filtering detections

    weighting photometry

    rejecting bad regions

    diagnosing hardware issues

If you want, I can also produce a ready‑to‑paste code skeleton that implements this entire pipeline end‑to‑end, but I figured you might want to save that for the next session when you’re ready to build it out.

Just let me know when you want the coding version.